
.. _quickstart:

Canu Quick Start
================

Canu specializes in assembling PacBio or Oxford Nanopre sequences.  Canu will correct the reads, then trim suspicious regions (such as remaining SMRTbell adapter), then
assemble the corrected and cleaned reads into unitigs.

Brief Introduction
-------------------
Canu has been designed to auto-detect your resources and scale itself to fit. Two parameters let you restrict the resources used.

::

 maxMemory=XX
 maxThreads=XX

Memory is specified in gigabytes. On a single machine, it will restrict Canu to at most this limit, on the grid, no single job will try to use more than the specified resources.

The input sequences can be FASTA or FASTQ format, uncompressed, or compressed with gz, bz2 or xz.

Running on the grid
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Canu is designed to run on grid environments (LSF/PBS/Torque/Slrum/SGE are supported). Currently, Canu will submit itself to the default queue with default time options. You can overwrite this behavior by providing any specific parameters you want to be used for submission as an option. Users should also specify a job name to use on the grid:

::

 gridOptionsJobName=myassembly
 "gridOptions=--partition quick --time 2:00"

Assembling PacBio data
----------------------

Pacific Biosciences released P6-C4 chemistry reads.  You can download them
`directly <https://s3.amazonaws.com/files.pacb.com/datasets/secondary-analysis/e-coli-k12-P6C4/p6c4_ecoli_RSII_DDR2_with_15kb_cut_E01_1.tar.gz>`_
(7 GB) or from the
`original page <https://github.com/PacificBiosciences/DevNet/wiki/E.-coli-Bacterial-Assembly>`_.
You must have the Pac Bio SMRTpipe software installed to extract the reads as FASTQ.

We made a 25X subset FASTQ available
`here <http://gembox.cbcb.umd.edu/mhap/raw/ecoli_p6_25x.filtered.fastq>`_

or use the following curl command:

::

 curl -L -o p6.25x.fastq http://gembox.cbcb.umd.edu/mhap/raw/ecoli_p6_25x.filtered.fastq
 
Correct, Trim and Assemble
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By default, canu will correct the reads, then trim the reads, then assemble the reads to unitigs.  

::

 canu \
  -p ecoli -d ecoli-auto \
  genomeSize=4.8m \
  -pacbio-raw p6.25x.fastq

This will use the prefix 'ecoli' to name files, compute the correction task in directory 'ecoli-auto/correction', the trimming task in directory 'ecoli-auto/trimming', and the unitig construction stage in 'ecoli-auto' itself.
Output files are described in the next section.

Find the Output
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The canu progress chatter records statistics such as an input read histogram, corrected read histogram, and overlap types. Outputs from the assembly tasks are in:

ecoli*/ecoli.correctedReads.fasta.gz
   The sequences after correction, trimmed and split based on consensus evidence. Typically >99% for PacBio and >98% for Nanopore but it can vary based on your input sequencing quality.

ecoli*/ecoli.trimmedReads.fasta.gz
   The sequences after correction and final trimming. The corrected sequences above are overlapped again to identify any missed hairpin adapters or bad sequence that could not be detected in the raw sequences.

ecoli*/ecoli.layout
   The layout provides information on where each read ended up in the final assembly, including contig and positions. It also includes the consensus sequence for each contig.
   
ecoli*/ecoli.gfa
   The `GFA <http://lh3.github.io/2014/07/19/a-proposal-of-the-grapical-fragment-assembly-format/>`_ is the assembly graph generated by Canu. Currently this includes the contigs, associated bubbles, and any overlaps which were not used by the assembly.
   
The fasta output is split into three types:

ecoli*/asm.contigs.fasta
   Everything which could be assembled and is part of the primary assembly, including both unique and repetitive elements.  Each contig has several flags included on the fasta def line::

   >tig######## len=<integer> reads=<integer> covStat=<float> gappedBases=<yes|no> class=<contig|bubble|unassm> suggestRepeat=<yes|no> suggestCircular=<yes|no>

   len
      Length of the sequence, in bp.

   reads
      Number of reads used to form the contig.

   covStat
      The log of the ratio of the contig being unique versus being two-copy, based on the read arrival rate.  Positive values indicate more likely to be unique, while negative values indicate more likely to be repetitive.  See `Footnote 24 <http://science.sciencemag.org/content/287/5461/2196.full#ref-24>`_ in `Myers et al., A Whole-Genome Assembly of Drosophila <http://science.sciencemag.org/content/287/5461/2196.full>`_.

   gappedBases
      If yes, the sequence includes all gaps in the multialignment.

   class
      Type of sequence.  Unassembled sequences are primarily low-coverage sequences spanned by a single read.

   suggestRepeat
      If yes, sequence was detected as a repeat based on graph topology or read overlaps to other sequences.

   suggestCircular
      If yes, sequence is likely circular.  Not implemented.

ecoli*/asm.bubbles.fasta
   alternate paths in the graph which could not be merged into the primary assembly.

ecoli*/asm.unassembled.fasta
   reads which could not be incorporated into the primary or bubble assemblies.


Correct, Trim and Assemble, Manually
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sometimes, however, it makes sense to do the three top-level tasks by hand.  This would allow trying
multiple unitig construction parameters on the same set of corrected and trimmed reads.

First, correct the raw reads::

 canu -correct \
   -p ecoli -d ecoli \
   genomeSize=4.8m \
   -pacbio-raw  p6.25x.fastq

Then, trim the output of the correction::

 canu -trim \
   -p ecoli -d ecoli \
   genomeSize=4.8m \
   -pacbio-corrected ecoli/correction/ecoli.correctedReads.fasta.gz

And finally, assemble the output of trimming, twice::

 canu -assemble \
   -p ecoli -d ecoli-erate-0.013 \
   genomeSize=4.8m \
   errorRate=0.013 \
   -pacbio-corrected ecoli/trimming/ecoli.trimmedReads.fasta.gz

 canu -assemble \
   -p ecoli -d ecoli-erate-0.025 \
   genomeSize=4.8m \
   errorRate=0.025 \
   -pacbio-corrected ecoli/trimming/ecoli.trimmedReads.fasta.gz

The directory layout for correction and trimming is exactly the same as when we ran all tasks in the same command.
Each unitig construction task needs its own private work space, and in there the 'correction' and 'trimming' directories are empty. The error rate always specifies the error in the corrected reads which is typically <1% for PacBio data and <2% for Nanopore data (<1% on newest chemistries).

Assembling Oxford Nanopore data
--------------------------------
A set of E. coli runs were released by the Loman lab.  You can download one
`directly <http://nanopore.s3.climb.ac.uk/MAP006-PCR-1_2D_pass.fasta>`_
or any of them from the
`original page <http://lab.loman.net/2015/09/24/first-sqk-map-006-experiment/>`_.

or use the following curl command:

::

 curl -L -o oxford.fasta http://nanopore.s3.climb.ac.uk/MAP006-PCR-1_2D_pass.fasta

Canu assembles any of the four available datasets into a single contig but we picked one dataset to use in this tutorial. Then, assemble the data as before::

 canu \
  -p ecoli -d ecoli-oxford \
  genomeSize=4.8m \
  -nanopore-raw oxford.fasta

The assembled identity is >99% before polishing.

Assembling With Multiple Technologies/Files 
-------------------------------------------

Canu takes an arbitrary number of input files/formats. We made a mixed dataset of about 10X of a PacBio P6 and 10X of an Oxford Nanopore run available `here <http://gembox.cbcb.umd.edu/mhap/raw/ecoliP6Oxford.tar.gz>`_

or use the following curl command:

::

 curl -L -o mix.tar.gz http://gembox.cbcb.umd.edu/mhap/raw/ecoliP6Oxford.tar.gz
 tar xvzf mix.tar.gz
 
Now you can assemble all the data::

 canu \
  -p ecoli -d ecoli-mix \
  genomeSize=4.8m \
  -pacbio-raw pacbio*fastq.gz \
  -nanopore-raw oxford.fasta.gz

.. _quick_low:

Assembling Low Coverage Datasets
----------------------------------
When you have 30X or less coverage, it helps to adjust the Canu assembly parameters. Typically, assembly 20X of single-molecule data outperforms hybrid methods with higher coverage. You can download a 20X subset of `S. cerevisae <http://gembox.cbcb.umd.edu/mhap/raw/yeast_filtered.20x.fastq.gz>`_
 
or use the following curl command:

::

 curl -L -o yeast.20x.fastq.gz http://gembox.cbcb.umd.edu/mhap/raw/yeast_filtered.20x.fastq.gz

and run the assembler adding sensitive parameters (**errorRate=0.035**)::

 canu \
  -p asm -d yeast \
  genomeSize=12.1m \
  errorRate=0.035 \
  -pacbio-raw yeast.20x.fastq.gz
  

After the run completes, we can check the assembly statistics::

 tgStoreDump -sizes -s 12100000 -T yeast/unitigging/asm.tigStore 2 -G yeast/unitigging/asm.gkpStore

::

   lenSuggestRepeat sum     160297 (genomeSize 12100000)
   lenSuggestRepeat num         12
   lenSuggestRepeat ave      13358
   lenUnassembled ng10       13491 bp   lg10      77   sum    1214310 bp
   lenUnassembled ng20       11230 bp   lg20     176   sum    2424556 bp
   lenUnassembled ng30        9960 bp   lg30     290   sum    3632411 bp
   lenUnassembled ng40        8986 bp   lg40     418   sum    4841978 bp
   lenUnassembled ng50        8018 bp   lg50     561   sum    6054460 bp
   lenUnassembled ng60        7040 bp   lg60     723   sum    7266816 bp
   lenUnassembled ng70        6169 bp   lg70     906   sum    8474192 bp
   lenUnassembled ng80        5479 bp   lg80    1114   sum    9684981 bp
   lenUnassembled ng90        4787 bp   lg90    1348   sum   10890099 bp
   lenUnassembled ng100       4043 bp   lg100   1624   sum   12103239 bp
   lenUnassembled ng110       3323 bp   lg110   1952   sum   13310167 bp
   lenUnassembled ng120       2499 bp   lg120   2370   sum   14520362 bp
   lenUnassembled ng130       1435 bp   lg130   2997   sum   15731198 bp
   lenUnassembled sum   16139888 (genomeSize 12100000)
   lenUnassembled num       3332
   lenUnassembled ave       4843
   lenContig ng10      770772 bp   lg10       2   sum    1566457 bp
   lenContig ng20      710140 bp   lg20       4   sum    3000257 bp
   lenContig ng30      669248 bp   lg30       5   sum    3669505 bp
   lenContig ng40      604859 bp   lg40       7   sum    4884914 bp
   lenContig ng50      552911 bp   lg50      10   sum    6571204 bp
   lenContig ng60      390415 bp   lg60      12   sum    7407061 bp
   lenContig ng70      236725 bp   lg70      16   sum    8521520 bp
   lenContig ng80      142854 bp   lg80      23   sum    9768299 bp
   lenContig ng90       94308 bp   lg90      33   sum   10927790 bp
   lenContig sum   12059140 (genomeSize 12100000)
   lenContig num         56
   lenContig ave     215341

Consensus Accuracy
-------------------
While Canu corrects sequences and has 99% identity or greater with PacBio or Nanopore sequences, for the best accuracy we recommend polishing with a sequence-specific tool. We recommend `Quiver <http://github.com/PacificBiosciences/GenomicConsensus>`_ for PacBio and `Nanopolish <http://github.com/jts/nanopolish>`_ for Oxford Nanpore data.

If you have Illumina sequences available, `Pilon <http://www.broadinstitute.org/software/pilon/>`_ can also be used to polish either PacBio or Oxford Nanopore assemblies.

Futher Reading
-------------------
See the `FAQ <faq.html>`_ page for commonly-asked questions and the `release <http://github.com/marbl/canu/releases>`_. notes page for information on what's changed and known issues.
