{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff0\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f2\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 02070309020205020404}Courier New;}{\f3\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05050102010706020507}Symbol;}{\f36\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 00000000000000000000}Courier (PCL6);}
{\f68\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f69\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f71\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f72\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}
{\f73\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f74\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f75\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f76\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}
{\f78\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f79\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f81\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f82\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f83\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}
{\f84\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f85\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f86\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}{\f88\fmodern\fcharset238\fprq1 Courier New CE;}{\f89\fmodern\fcharset204\fprq1 Courier New Cyr;}
{\f91\fmodern\fcharset161\fprq1 Courier New Greek;}{\f92\fmodern\fcharset162\fprq1 Courier New Tur;}{\f93\fmodern\fcharset177\fprq1 Courier New (Hebrew);}{\f94\fmodern\fcharset178\fprq1 Courier New (Arabic);}
{\f95\fmodern\fcharset186\fprq1 Courier New Baltic;}{\f96\fmodern\fcharset163\fprq1 Courier New (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\s3\ql \fi-360\li504\ri0\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar\jclisttab\tx720{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec }
\faauto\ls3\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin504\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext15 header;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{
\s17\qj \li360\ri0\sb120\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin360\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext17 Indent;}{\s18\ql \li0\ri0\sb120\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\b\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon15 \snext18 Myheader;}{\s19\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f2\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext19 Plain Text;}{\*\cs20 
\additive \ul\cf2 \sbasedon10 Hyperlink;}{\*\cs21 \additive \ul\cf12 \sbasedon10 FollowedHyperlink;}}{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid-1354628388\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace0
\levelindent0{\leveltext\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fbias0 \s3\fi-360\li720\jclisttab\tx720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid62534223}{\list\listtemplateid1057524370\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1
\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fbias0 \fi-360\li720\jclisttab\tx720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1645040802}{\list\listtemplateid1340908148\listsimple{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0
\levelstartat1\levelspace0\levelindent0{\leveltext\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fbias0 \fi-360\li720\jclisttab\tx720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1928727316}}{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1645040802\listoverridecount0\ls1}
{\listoverride\listid1928727316\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid62534223\listoverridecount0\ls3}}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid11564486}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 10.0.4524;}{\info{\title NAME}{\author Gene Myers}{\operator Jason Miller}
{\creatim\yr1999\mo8\dy7\hr14\min54}{\revtim\yr2004\mo2\dy9\hr16\min16}{\printim\yr1998\mo10\dy13\hr11\min28}{\version3}{\edmins1}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords1404}{\nofchars8004}{\*\company Celera Genomics}{\nofcharsws9390}{\vern16475}}\margt1170 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dghspace120\dgvspace120\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow3
\jcompress\viewkind4\viewscale155\viewzk2\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot11564486 \fet0\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\header \pard\plain \s15\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\tqr\tx8640\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 CONFIDENTIAL\tab Assembly Team Doc
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sb120\widctlpar\tqr\tx8550\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\b\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 TESTER(1)\tab TESTER(1)
\par NAME
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \li360\ri0\sb120\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin360\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 tester  }{\insrsid11564486 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 45 \\f "Symbol" \\s 10}{\fldrslt\f3\fs20}}}
{\insrsid11564486   A analyzer and statistics generating program for the assembler output
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sb120\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 SYNOPSIS
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \li360\ri0\sb120\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin360\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 tester  [-L #]  [-c] [-h] [-p] [-o <output file>] [-d <dna file>] <root file name>
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sb120\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 DESCRIPTION
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \li360\ri0\sb120\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin360\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\i\insrsid11564486 Tester }{\insrsid11564486 
reads the output files from the assembly program and measures how well the assembly worked based on a number of statistics.
\par The \endash L option specifies at whi
ch level the tester program should be run.  The tester program has three different levels.  Level 1 (the default level) assumes that no simulation information is available.  Thus only general statistics about the size and structures of the assembly may be
 generated.  Levels 2 and 3 assume the existence of a dna file as generated by the celsim program.  This file will be generated when celsim is invoked using the \endash 
d option.  Level 2 assumes that the original DNA strand is known, but there is no information o
n its internal repeats.  This will be true when celsim is given an existing DNA strand to shotgun.  Level 3 assumes that the dna file contains not only the original DNA sequence, but also the positions of the repeats within it.
\par The \endash c option makes the test
er open a slew of celagram windows.  This allows the user to view the histograms in a graphical format.  The files used by celagram are named <root_file_name>.tst#.cel.  The tester program removes these files before exiting.  It does wait, however, until 
t
he user closes the last celagram window created to be closed before completing.  (This is to insure that a data file is not closed before it is read.)  There is a time penalty for using this option, but it may be worth it to see the data graphically displ
ayed.
\par The \endash h option causes to create the celagram data files talked about above.  If used with the \endash 
c option the only difference is the files (<root>.tst#.cel) are not removed before the program exits.  This option allows one call celagram to view some of t
he data graphically, without having to deal with all of the windows.  The drawback to this option is that the naming convention of the files is not very frienly. 
\par The \endash p option tells tester to send its output to stdout.  Normally tester sends its output to <root_file_name>.tst.  The \endash p option converts tester into a pipe.  This option overrides the \endash o option.
\par The \endash o option allows the user to specify an output file other than <root_file_name>.tst
\par The \endash d option allows the user to specify a dna file.  Normally tester looks for the file <root_file_name>.dna to be used as the dna file.  This option is only meaningful if the level is set above 1.
\par If the string used for the <root file name> ends in \'93.cns\'94, this extension is removed and the prefix is treated as the root name.  The string \'93.cns\'94
 is appended to the root file name and tester attempts to open this file.  If  this attempt fails, tester then attempts to open the file without the extension.  Thus a file whose name does not end in \'93.cns\'94 may be used as input,
 though this file is assumed to be the one output by the consensus module of the assembler.
\par The program will normally be called using only the \endash L, -c, or -h options.  For example:
\par }{\b\f2\insrsid11564486 tester \endash L2 a004
\par }{\insrsid11564486 Using this call tester opens the files a004.cns and a004.dna for input and sends its output to a004.tst. 
\par }{\b\f2\insrsid11564486 tester \endash c a004}{\f2\insrsid11564486 
\par }{\insrsid11564486 Using this call tester opens the file a004.cns, sends it\rquote s output to a004.tst, and opens many celagram windows to display some of the results.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sb120\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 FUTURE WORK
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \li360\ri0\sb120\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin360\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 Unfortunately I ran out of time befo
re I could finish my list of work on the tester program.  I will list here what needs to be done and some idea of how I had planned to go about doing it.
\par 
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\s3 \f1\fs20 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 1.\tab}}\pard\plain \s3\ql \fi-360\li504\ri0\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar\jclisttab\tx720{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120\pnhang {\pntxta .}}
\faauto\ls3\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin504\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 The contig checking needs to be revised.  
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \li360\ri0\sb120\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlcont\ilvl0\ls0\pnrnot0\pndec }\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin360\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 
Right now I look at the simulator coordinates of the fragments and the extreme ends of a contig to get the starting and ending location for the contig.  The difference between these numbers gives the actual contig length.  This is compared with the length
 of the consensus.  If these two numbers differ by too much, the contig is marked BAD (in the code the bad flag of the contig structure is set to \endash 
1) and a message is printed out.  Then the simulator coordinate of each fragment in the contig is examined to 
determine if it lies between the starting and ending locations of the contig.  If it does not, then a count (also the bad flag in the contig structure) is incremented.  In the end this count tells how many fragments within the contig are misplaced.
\par The abo
ve scheme works well under most situations.  The problem would be if the Repeat Resolver misplaces a fragment at the end of a contig.  While the contig would essentially still be good, the starting or ending location would be way off and thus the contig w
ould end up looking bad.  I had planned to resolve this by using code similar to that which sets the collapse field in the unitig structure.  Each fragment would get a \lquote vote\rquote 
 as to where in the genome the contig came from.  The majority rules.  I would then
 take the simulator coordinates from the two extreme fragments that voted with the majority, extend those numbers as needed to cover the consensus, and use those as my starting and ending locations.  Notice this will make the length check no longer applic
able, so I would probably still treat as BAD contigs with too many fragments out of place or perhaps those that required too large an extension to the extreme fragments to cover the consensus.
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\s3 \f1\fs20 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 2.\tab}}\pard\plain \s3\ql \fi-360\li504\ri0\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar\jclisttab\tx720{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120\pnhang {\pntxta .}}
\faauto\ls3\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin504\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 The calls to celegram need to be made interactive.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \li360\ri0\sb120\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlcont\ilvl0\ls0\pnrnot0\pndec }\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin360\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 I hate that I didn\rquote 
t get to this, but oh well.  This is pretty much self-explanatory.  After the calculations are done a simple menu should be displayed allowing the user to select which celegram files to display.  The only nasty thing here is that currently the ce
legram files are named by tacking a number onto a common root.  While this makes the creation, deletion, and any handling of ALL the files easy to code and maintain, it means the file names will change when new files are added.  Also the file names will b
e
 different based on what level the tester is run at.  The solution is more work when creating and updating the interactive portion, changing to the file names to ones that depend on the data input which means more work when creating and deleting the files
, or perhaps adding a code to the beginning of a file (maybe 30 chars in from the title screen) which tells the program which data file it is.
\par 
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\s3 \f1\fs20 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 3.\tab}}\pard\plain \s3\ql \fi-360\li504\ri0\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar\jclisttab\tx720{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120\pnhang {\pntxta .}}
\faauto\ls3\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin504\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 Histogram of Contig Lengths as Requested by Mark
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \li360\ri0\sb120\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlcont\ilvl0\ls0\pnrnot0\pndec }\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin360\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 
Mark wants a histogram of the lengths of the contigs in base pairs.  This would be a 2 minute addition except for the fact that I currently don\rquote t store information on contigs which aren\rquote t placed.  I did this because I didn\rquote 
t believe non-placed contigs to be interesting (they are just unitigs with a new name after a
ll) and I wanted to save some memory.  One could change the global variable Contigs from an array of pointers to ContigT structures (these pointers are set to NULL for non-placed contigs) to an array of ContigT structures and read in all contigs.  If this
 
is done an extra field will need to be added to distinguish the placed contigs and all code which deals with contigs will have to be adjusted accordingly.  If I had done this I think I would have just added a special array to store the lengths of all cont
igs as that\rquote s the only bit of information needed for this histogram.  (Notice that the length field of the ICM message includes the \endash \lquote 
s, so some work will be required to get the correct length.)  Mark also wanted an identical histogram except that instead o
f each bucket containing the number of contigs of that size, it would contain the sum of the lengths of the contigs of that size.  (See Granger if you need further clarification.)  This histogram will be a bit of a pain as so far all histograms are handle
d by the CalcStats & PrintStats procedures which won\rquote t work for this.
\par 
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\s3 \f1\fs20 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 4.\tab}}\pard\plain \s3\ql \fi-360\li504\ri0\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar\jclisttab\tx720{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120\pnhang {\pntxta .}}
\faauto\ls3\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin504\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 Command Line Switch to Turn of Sequence Comparison
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \li360\ri0\sb120\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlcont\ilvl0\ls0\pnrnot0\pndec }\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin360\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 
As you can see from the code I wrote my own banded, dynamic programming routine to compare the consensus with the original sequence.  Since it\rquote 
s banded it uses linear time/space to do the comparison, but it does add a bit of time for large files.  Thus I\rquote ve toyed with the idea of allowing it to be turned off to save compute time.  (Actually the lion\rquote 
s share of time is in the I/O, not the sequence comparison)
\par 
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\s3 \f1\fs20 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 5.\tab}}\pard\plain \s3\ql \fi-360\li504\ri0\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar\jclisttab\tx720{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120\pnhang {\pntxta .}}
\faauto\ls3\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin504\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 Histogram of Quality Values of Missed Calls
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \li360\ri0\sb120\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlcont\ilvl0\ls0\pnrnot0\pndec }\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin360\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 
Speaking of the sequence comparison, you may wonder why with a banded matrix I used linear space instead of constant space.  This was to save time (backtracking) to get the actual al
ignment.  The only reason I can think of to want the actual alignment is to look at the quality values of the missed calls.
\par 
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\s3 \f1\fs20 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 6.\tab}}\pard\plain \s3\ql \fi-360\li504\ri0\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar\jclisttab\tx720{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120\pnhang {\pntxta .}}
\faauto\ls3\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin504\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 Breakdown of Types of Missed Calls
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \li360\ri0\sb120\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlcont\ilvl0\ls0\pnrnot0\pndec }\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin360\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 
No one asked for this, but I thought it would be interesting.  This would simply be a count 
of how many miss calls were insertions, deletions, and substitutions.  Is our assembler biased toward making a specific type of mistake?  If one calculates number 5 above, this would be a simple add on.
\par 
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\s3 \f1\fs20 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 7.\tab}}\pard\plain \s3\ql \fi-360\li504\ri0\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar\jclisttab\tx720{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120\pnhang {\pntxta .}}
\faauto\ls3\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin504\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 Histogram of Quality Values of All the Consensus
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \li360\ri0\sb120\widctlpar{\*\pn \pnlvlcont\ilvl0\ls0\pnrnot0\pndec }\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin360\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 
This would actually be very easy to add.  If it had been higher on my list (where I would have seen it before now) I would have done it already.
\par 
\par {\pntext\pard\plain\s3 \f1\fs20 \hich\af1\dbch\af0\loch\f1 8.\tab}}\pard\plain \s3\ql \fi-360\li504\ri0\sb240\sa60\keepn\widctlpar\jclisttab\tx720{\*\pn \pnlvlbody\ilvl0\ls3\pnrnot0\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent360\pnsp120\pnhang {\pntxta .}}
\faauto\ls3\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin504\itap0 \f1\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 Report on How Many Unitigs are Actually Splitable
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \li360\ri0\sb120\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin360\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 Talk to Knut about this one.  He basically wants to kno
w how many of the invalid unitigs his routine has a chance of splitting.  Also tell him I\rquote m sorry I didn\rquote t get this in.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \li0\ri0\sb120\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 AUTHORS
\par }\pard\plain \s17\qj \li360\ri0\sb120\widctlpar\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin360\itap0 \fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\insrsid11564486 {\*\bkmkstart _Hlt435346562}Eric Anson:  }{\f36\insrsid11564486 
\par {\*\bkmkend _Hlt435346562}Created July 7, \lquote 99
\par }}